Add configuration hints when ``run_actor_network`` raises a memory error (#22561)
rapidsai/cudf: docs/cudf/source/cudf_polars/memory_errors.md

Author: @wence- - How does this look? If https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf/pull/22252 gets in first, I can also link to the main config page here.

(cudf-polars-memory-errors)=
# Troubleshooting Memory Issues

> This page covers the most common causes of out-of-memory (OOM) errors and slow spilling

Reviewer: I think, like my recommendations to Mads, we should try and structure this doc according to https://diataxis.fr/. In particular, I think this should fall into the "explanation" category https://diataxis.fr/explanation/.

Right now, this page kind of assumes you already know all of these things, like what spilling is, how to know if your queries shuffles data, etc...

Author: Good feedback. I'll revise.

> when using the GPU streaming engine, and how to address them.

Reviewer: question: "what is spilling?"

## Out-of-memory errors

### Lower the target partition size

The GPU streaming engine decomposes input data into a stream of chunks that can be
operated on in GPU memory independently. `target_partition_size` sets the ideal size
of each chunk in bytes. Reducing this size makes it easier for the engine to stay within
its memory budget, since each chunk is a smaller unit of work to spill and unspill. The
trade-off is that smaller chunks may reduce compute efficiency.

```python
engine = pl.GPUEngine(
    executor="streaming",
    executor_options={"target_partition_size": 64_000_000},  # 64 MB
)
```

Or via environment variable:

```
CUDF_POLARS__EXECUTOR__TARGET_PARTITION_SIZE=64000000
```

The default is the lesser of 1.5 GB and 2.5% of the smallest GPU in the system.
For pathological workloads with heavy shuffling or skewed data distributions, a

> much smaller value may be necessary.

Reviewer: question: what is shuffling, how would I know if my workload is pathological and/or has heavy shuffling.

(cudf-polars-memory-errors)=
# Understanding Memory Use in the GPU Streaming Engine

The GPU streaming engine is designed to execute queries on datasets that are larger
than GPU memory. This page explains how the engine manages memory, why out-of-memory
errors occur, and how spilling to host memory works, so that you can reason about
and tune memory-related behaviour in your workloads.

## How the engine uses GPU memory

Rather than loading an entire dataset into GPU memory at once, the streaming engine
decomposes input data into a sequence of *chunks* and processes them independently.
`target_partition_size` controls the target size of each chunk in bytes. Chunks flow
through the query graph, being filtered, transformed, aggregated, and joined, and

> intermediate results are also chunked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
through the query graph, being filtered, transformed, aggregated, and joined.
When operations change the size of a chunk, chunks are split or combined to
be approximately `target_partition_size` bytes.
```

Reviewer: This is not true of, for example, filtering today.

Author: Okay yeah, I tweaked the wording to "chunks **may be** split or combined ..."

The default chunk size is the lesser of 1.5 GB and 2.5% of the smallest GPU in the

> cluster. For most workloads this leaves enough headroom for intermediate results

Reviewer: TODO (followup): we c(sh?)ould support heterogeneous clusters by allowing differently sized GPUs to have different target partition sizes.

Author: I don't think so. We can possibly track two different values, local- vs global- target partition size. However, we need to use a consistent value for any dynamic-planning decision. So, we will always want something like the global `target_partition_size` we have now.

without sacrificing compute efficiency, but it is not optimal for every query.
The optimal chunk size is much smaller than total memory of a single GPU. This is
because RapidsMPF overlaps the execution of multiple operations across the actor graph,
and each operation requires temporary allocations for its input, output, and
intermediate data buffers.

## Why out-of-memory errors occur

The `target_partition_size` setting establishes a *target*, not a hard ceiling.
Some situations lead to oversized chunks, or require the engine to hold many
chunks in memory simultaneously.

### Shuffle-heavy operations

A *shuffle* is a cluster-wide redistribution of data so that rows with matching keys
land on the same GPU. During a shuffle, each GPU must hold both the data it is sending

> and the data it is receiving, which can temporarily increase memory pressure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
land on the same GPU. During a shuffle each GPU must hold both the data it is sending
and the data it is receiving, which can temporarily increase memory pressure.
```

Shuffles arise in several common operations. A `sort` over the full dataset must
redistribute rows into a globally ordered sequence. A `group_by` over a column
with many unique values must route every distinct key to the same GPU before aggregating.
A `join` must align rows from both tables by their join keys before comparing them.
Queries with skewed value distributions are especially prone to memory spikes because

> a single GPU (or chunk) may receive a disproportionately large share of the shuffled data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shuffles arise in several common operations. A `sort` of the full dataset must
redistribute rows into a globally ordered sequence. A `group_by` when the key column has many distinct values must arrange for every distinct key to be on the same GPU before aggregating.
A `join` must align rows from both tables by their join keys before comparing them.
Queries with skewed value distributions are especially prone to memory spikes because
a single GPU (or chunk) may receive a disproportionately large share of the shuffled data.
```

### Buffering for multiple consumers

When the output of an operation is consumed by more than one downstream operation,
the engine must keep that output in memory until all consumers have consumed it.
A query plan with a shared sub-plan or a self-join can therefore hold multiple
chunks in memory simultaneously even if each individual operation is within budget.

### File format constraints

The minimum amount of data the engine can read at one time depends on the file format.

> For Parquet, the engine can read as little as one row group at a time, so files written

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Parquet, the engine can read as little as one column of one row group at a time, so files written
```

Ignoring pages, which I think is fine for this document.

Author: I used the "proper" term _column chunk_ - Hopefully that works.

with reasonable row-group sizes give the engine fine-grained control over how much data
enters the pipeline at once. For formats that do not support partial reads, such as CSV,
the engine must load an entire file before it can begin processing, which may produce
chunks much larger than `target_partition_size`.

## Spilling to host memory

When GPU memory pressure rises above a configurable threshold
(`RAPIDSMPF_SPILL_DEVICE_LIMIT`, default `80%`), the engine begins *spilling*: moving

> chunks that are not currently being processed from GPU memory to host (CPU) RAM. Once

Reviewer: ```suggestion
chunks that are not currently being processed from GPU to host (CPU) memory. Once
```

> the operation that needs them resumes, those chunks are brought back to the GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the operation that needs them resumes, the chunks are then unspilled back to the GPU.
```

Spilling lets the engine handle datasets larger than GPU memory, but every spill and
unspill requires a GPU-to-host data transfer, and the operation depending on that
chunk must wait until the transfer completes.

If spilling is occurring but the GPU still runs out of memory, it usually means the
peak allocation within a single operation is too large. Reducing `target_partition_size`
makes each operation smaller, and lowering `RAPIDSMPF_SPILL_DEVICE_LIMIT` causes
spilling to start earlier, leaving more headroom for those peaks.

## Pinned memory and transfer speed

By default, host memory used for spilling is *pageable*. The operating system may
swap it to disk, and GPU-to-host transfers must go through an extra copy. *Pinned*
(page-locked) memory bypasses this: the GPU DMA engine can transfer directly to and
from it, significantly increasing bandwidth.

The trade-off is that registering pinned memory with the driver has a substantial
up-front cost. This cost is only worthwhile if spilling is a clear bottleneck in your
workflow, or if you are executing many queries in the same session so the cost can be

> amortized across them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trade-off is that registering pinned memory with the driver has a substantial
up-front cost. Pinned memory also reduces the amount of host memory available for other work on the system: pinned pages cannot be swapped out or migrated by the operating system. These costs are therefore only worthwhile if spilling is a clear bottleneck in your
workflow, or if you are executing many queries in the same session. Consequently, if we want to spill to pinned memory we must explicitly opt in when constructing the GPU engine for queries.
```
